---
title: Using Pandoc for your documents
subtitle: The everything markup tool
author:
  name: rini
  url: https://rinici.de
date: Mar. 01, 2025
---

> *I got you, my first post was not about how I made my blog. It's the second one that was!*

One of my favourite tools is probably [Pandoc]. It allows you to write documents in a multitude of
markup languages and output them in many different formats. It has a [dauntingly long manual][man]
listing a lot of options, but I mainly like using it with its Markdown extensions:

    pandoc input.md > output.html

There are ~40 input and ~60 output formats, and \~70 extensions supported by Pandoc, so you could
also, for example:

- Output PDFs with `-o file.pdf`
- Write manual pages with `-t man`, view them with `pandoc -t man | man -l -`
- Write a [Literate Haskell] document in reStructuredText with `-f rst+lhs`

The next sections will talk about putting together blog-ish (really I use it for everything) HTML
pages, ~~(and this is directed at some people I want to convert)~~ but if I've convinced you to
[install] it, do poke around the [user's guide][man]!

Out of the box you get a lot of Markdown extensions, let's see some of them!

[pandoc]: https://pandoc.org/
[man]: https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html
[literate haskell]: https://wiki.haskell.org/Literate_programming
[install]: https://pandoc.org/installing.html

## Hello, Pandoc!

````md
## Hello, Pandoc!

You can use *italics* and **bolds**, but also superscripts^2^ and subscripts~i~. You can use [named links] like that or like [this][named links]. You can use footnote references[^1] or write them inline.^[Like that!]

::: note
You can create `<div>`{.html}s like this. Oh, and add attributes like that.

::: warning
You have been warned. They can be nested.
:::

:::

[named links]: /this-is-a-really-long-path-with-fifty-four-characters

[^1]: This shows up at the bottom of the page!
````

The above looks like this:

You can use *italics* and **bolds**, but also superscripts^2^ and subscripts~i~. You can use [named links] like that or like [this][named links]. You can use footnote references[^1] or write them inline.^[Like that!]

::: note
You can create `<div>`{.html}s like this. Oh, and add attributes like that.

::: warning
You have been warned. They can be nested.
:::

:::

[named links]: /this-is-a-really-long-path-with-fifty-four-characters

[^1]: This shows up at the bottom of the page!

## Page metadata {#metadata}

Adding metadata to markdown files can be done with YAML blocks:

```yaml
---
title: My awesome post
subtitle: it's real good
author: You
date: Apr. 01, 1970
---
```

These fit in the document's [template](#templates). If you don't want to bother with one,
`--standalone` includes a default for all formats, and [there are several more variables for each
format](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#variables-for-html).

If you're writing a `man(1)` page, the title should be in the `name(section)` format. There's also a
shorter syntax for setting a title, author and date:

```
% rini(1)
% Rini Curry
% April 1970
```

## Template crash course {#templates}

You can use `--template` to specify a file with the skeleton of the document. Templates are
interpolated with `$variables$`. Here's a really simple one:

```html
<!doctype html>
<html lang="en">
  <body>
    <header>
      <h1>$title$</h1>
    </header>

    <main>
      $body$
    </main>
  </body>
</html>
```

Sometimes it's nice to have some optional metadata:

```html
<header>
  <h1>$title$</h1>
  $if(subtitle)$
  <p>$subtitle$</p>
  $endif$
</header>
```

Or, maybe lots of metadata:

```html
$for(author)$$author$$sep$, $endfor$
```

`$sep$` is a nice directive that only adds the text following it if its between two elements. Also,
`$for$` doesn't need to always iterate through an array- if it's one element, it'll iterate once, if
it's empty, it won't iterate. Quite handy!

## Putting it together

Now that we have our own template, making a blog is pretty easy. We can create a configuration file
to avoid passing lots of options in the CLI, like so:

```yaml
template: template.html # use our template
reader: markdown-smart # disable “smart” quotes
wrap: none # disable wrapping input to 72 columns, it's $curYear!
```

And run pandoc for each markdown file in a folder. The following is basically (but not quite, I have
a little fancier thing to avoid updating too many files) what I have on my website:

```sh
for $post in posts/*; do
  pandoc --defaults pandoc.yaml $post -o public/posts/$(basename $post .md).html
done
```
